README.md, before:

# SQL2SPARQL - Automatic SQL to SPARQL Converter

A production-ready implementation of the SQL2SPARQL4RDF framework for automatic conversion of SQL queries to SPARQL queries, enabling direct querying of RDF data using familiar SQL syntax.

Based on the research paper:
> **SQL2SPARQL4RDF: Automatic SQL to SPARQL Conversion for RDF Querying**
> Ahmed ABATAL, Khadija Alaoui, Mohamed Bahaj, Larbi Alaoui
> *International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications (IJACSA)*, Vol. 10, No. 11, 2019
> DOI: [10.1145/3372938.3372968](https://doi.org/10.1145/3372938.3372968)

## Features

✅ **Complete SQL Support**
- SELECT queries with JOIN, WHERE, GROUP BY, HAVING, ORDER BY
- Aggregate functions (COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, MAX)
- INSERT and DELETE operations
- UNION, INTERSECT, EXCEPT combinations

✅ **RDF Integration**
- Automatic schema extraction from RDF data
- Support for multiple RDF formats (Turtle, RDF/XML, N3, JSON-LD)
- Integration with popular RDF stores (AllegroGraph, Fuseki, Blazegraph, Virtuoso)
- In-memory processing with RDFLib

✅ **Developer Friendly**
- Rich CLI interface with syntax highlighting
- Python API for integration
- Comprehensive test suite
- Detailed logging and error messages

## Installation

```bash
# Install from source
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/sql2sparql
cd sql2sparql
pip install -e .

# Or install with pip
pip install sql2sparql
```

## Quick Start

### Command Line Usage

```bash
# Convert a simple SQL query
sql2sparql convert -s "SELECT name, email FROM client" -r data.ttl

# Extract schema from RDF data
sql2sparql extract-schema -r data.ttl -o schema.json

# Batch convert SQL queries
sql2sparql batch-convert -s queries.sql -r data.ttl -o output/

# Test connection to SPARQL endpoint
sql2sparql test-connection -e http://localhost:3030/sparql

# Show examples
sql2sparql examples
```

### Python API Usage

```python
from sql2sparql import SQL2SPARQLConverter, SchemaMapper, SPARQLExecutor
from sql2sparql.executors.sparql_executor import StoreType
from rdflib import Graph

# Load RDF data
graph = Graph()
graph.parse("data.ttl", format="turtle")

# Extract schema
schema_mapper = SchemaMapper(graph)
schema = schema_mapper.extract_schema()

# Create converter
converter = SQL2SPARQLConverter(schema_mapper)

# Convert SQL to SPARQL
sql_query = "SELECT name, email FROM client WHERE age > 25"
sparql_query = converter.convert(sql_query)
print(sparql_query)

# Execute SPARQL query
executor = SPARQLExecutor(store_type=StoreType.RDFLIB, graph=graph)
results = executor.execute_query(sparql_query)
for row in results:
    print(row)
```

## Supported SQL Constructs

### SELECT Queries
```sql
-- Simple SELECT
SELECT name, email FROM client

-- With WHERE clause
SELECT * FROM product WHERE price > 100

-- With JOIN
SELECT client.name, order.date
FROM client, order
WHERE client.id = order.client_id

-- With aggregates
SELECT category, COUNT(*), AVG(price)
FROM product
GROUP BY category
HAVING COUNT(*) > 5

-- With ORDER BY and LIMIT
SELECT name, price FROM product
ORDER BY price DESC
LIMIT 10
```

### INSERT Queries
```sql
INSERT INTO client (name, email, age)
VALUES ('John Doe', 'john@example.com', 30)
```

### DELETE Queries
```sql
DELETE FROM client WHERE age < 18
```

## Architecture

The system follows a modular architecture:

```
sql2sparql/
├── core/
│   ├── converter.py      # Main converter orchestrator
│   ├── schema_mapper.py  # RDF schema extraction
│   └── models.py         # Data models
├── parsers/
│   └── sql_parser.py     # SQL query parser
├── converters/
│   ├── select_converter.py      # SELECT clause converter
│   ├── where_converter.py       # WHERE clause converter
│   ├── group_having_converter.py # GROUP BY/HAVING converter
│   └── insert_delete_converter.py # INSERT/DELETE converter
├── executors/
│   └── sparql_executor.py       # SPARQL execution engine
└── cli/
    └── main.py                   # CLI interface
```

## Conversion Algorithm

The conversion follows these steps:

1. **Schema Extraction**: Analyze RDF data to extract a relational schema
2. **SQL Parsing**: Parse SQL query into structured components
3. **Pattern Generation**: Convert SQL elements to SPARQL triple patterns
4. **Query Construction**: Assemble SPARQL query with proper syntax
5. **Execution**: Run SPARQL on RDF store and return results

## RDF Store Integration

### AllegroGraph
```python
executor = SPARQLExecutor(
    store_type=StoreType.ALLEGROGRAPH,
    endpoint="http://localhost:10035/repositories/myrepo/sparql",
    username="user",
    password="pass"
)
```

### Apache Jena Fuseki
```python
executor = SPARQLExecutor(
    store_type=StoreType.FUSEKI,
    endpoint="http://localhost:3030/dataset/sparql"
)
```

### Blazegraph
```python
executor = SPARQLExecutor(
    store_type=StoreType.BLAZEGRAPH,
    endpoint="http://localhost:9999/blazegraph/sparql"
)
```

## Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=sql2sparql

# Run specific test module
pytest tests/test_converter.py
```

## Performance Considerations

- **Schema Caching**: Schema extraction is cached after first run
- **Query Optimization**: Generated SPARQL queries are optimized for execution
- **Batch Processing**: Support for batch conversion of multiple queries
- **Connection Pooling**: Reuse connections to remote SPARQL endpoints

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## Citation

If you use this software in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@inproceedings{abatal2019sql2sparql,
  title={SQL2SPARQL4RDF: Automatic SQL to SPARQL Conversion for RDF Querying},
  author={Abatal, Ahmed and Alaoui, Khadija and Bahaj, Mohamed and Alaoui, Larbi},
  booktitle={International Conference on Advanced Computer Science and Applications},
  year={2019},
  doi={10.1145/3372938.3372968}
}
```

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

This implementation is based on the research paper:

**SQL2SPARQL4RDF: Automatic SQL to SPARQL Conversion for RDF Querying**
- Authors: Ahmed ABATAL¹, Khadija Alaoui², Mohamed Bahaj⁴, Larbi Alaoui³
- ¹²⁴ Mathematics and Computer Science Department, Hassan I University, Faculty of Sciences and Techniques, Settat, Morocco
- ³ Mathematics and Computer Science Department, International University of Rabat, Sala Al Jadida, Morocco
- Published in: International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications (IJACSA), Vol. 10, No. 11, 2019
- Conference: October 2019
- DOI: 10.1145/3372938.3372968
- Citations: 3 | Reads: 1,100+

Special thanks to the authors for their comprehensive algorithms and framework design that made this implementation possible.

## Support

For issues, questions, or suggestions, please:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Contact the maintainers
- Check the documentation

## Roadmap

- [ ] Support for more complex SQL constructs (subqueries, CTEs)
- [ ] Query optimization engine
- [ ] GraphQL interface
- [ ] Docker containerization
- [ ] Web UI for interactive conversion
- [ ] Support for additional RDF stores
- [ ] Performance benchmarking suite

Commit message:

Update documentation to clarify this is an independent implementation

README.md, after:

# SQL2SPARQL - Automatic SQL to SPARQL Converter

An independent, production-ready implementation of SQL to SPARQL conversion for direct RDF querying using familiar SQL syntax.

## About This Implementation

This is an original implementation inspired by algorithms described in the academic literature, particularly the paper "SQL2SPARQL4RDF" (ABATAL et al., 2019). The code, architecture, and engineering decisions are entirely our own work.

## Features

✅ **Complete SQL Support**
- SELECT queries with JOIN, WHERE, GROUP BY, HAVING, ORDER BY
- Aggregate functions (COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, MAX)
- INSERT and DELETE operations
- UNION, INTERSECT, EXCEPT combinations

✅ **RDF Integration**
- Automatic schema extraction from RDF data
- Support for multiple RDF formats (Turtle, RDF/XML, N3, JSON-LD)
- Integration with popular RDF stores (AllegroGraph, Fuseki, Blazegraph, Virtuoso)
- In-memory processing with RDFLib

✅ **Developer Friendly**
- Rich CLI interface with syntax highlighting
- Python API for integration
- Comprehensive test suite
- Detailed logging and error messages

## Installation

```bash
# Install from source
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/sql2sparql
cd sql2sparql
pip install -e .

# Or install with pip
pip install sql2sparql
```

## Quick Start

### Command Line Usage

```bash
# Convert a simple SQL query
sql2sparql convert -s "SELECT name, email FROM client" -r data.ttl

# Extract schema from RDF data
sql2sparql extract-schema -r data.ttl -o schema.json

# Batch convert SQL queries
sql2sparql batch-convert -s queries.sql -r data.ttl -o output/

# Test connection to SPARQL endpoint
sql2sparql test-connection -e http://localhost:3030/sparql

# Show examples
sql2sparql examples
```

### Python API Usage

```python
from sql2sparql import SQL2SPARQLConverter, SchemaMapper, SPARQLExecutor
from sql2sparql.executors.sparql_executor import StoreType
from rdflib import Graph

# Load RDF data
graph = Graph()
graph.parse("data.ttl", format="turtle")

# Extract schema
schema_mapper = SchemaMapper(graph)
schema = schema_mapper.extract_schema()

# Create converter
converter = SQL2SPARQLConverter(schema_mapper)

# Convert SQL to SPARQL
sql_query = "SELECT name, email FROM client WHERE age > 25"
sparql_query = converter.convert(sql_query)
print(sparql_query)

# Execute SPARQL query
executor = SPARQLExecutor(store_type=StoreType.RDFLIB, graph=graph)
results = executor.execute_query(sparql_query)
for row in results:
    print(row)
```

## Supported SQL Constructs

### SELECT Queries
```sql
-- Simple SELECT
SELECT name, email FROM client

-- With WHERE clause
SELECT * FROM product WHERE price > 100

-- With JOIN
SELECT client.name, order.date
FROM client, order
WHERE client.id = order.client_id

-- With aggregates
SELECT category, COUNT(*), AVG(price)
FROM product
GROUP BY category
HAVING COUNT(*) > 5

-- With ORDER BY and LIMIT
SELECT name, price FROM product
ORDER BY price DESC
LIMIT 10
```

### INSERT Queries
```sql
INSERT INTO client (name, email, age)
VALUES ('John Doe', 'john@example.com', 30)
```

### DELETE Queries
```sql
DELETE FROM client WHERE age < 18
```

## Architecture

The system follows a modular architecture:

```
sql2sparql/
├── core/
│   ├── converter.py      # Main converter orchestrator
│   ├── schema_mapper.py  # RDF schema extraction
│   └── models.py         # Data models
├── parsers/
│   └── sql_parser.py     # SQL query parser
├── converters/
│   ├── select_converter.py      # SELECT clause converter
│   ├── where_converter.py       # WHERE clause converter
│   ├── group_having_converter.py # GROUP BY/HAVING converter
│   └── insert_delete_converter.py # INSERT/DELETE converter
├── executors/
│   └── sparql_executor.py       # SPARQL execution engine
└── cli/
    └── main.py                   # CLI interface
```

## Conversion Algorithm

The conversion follows these steps:

1. **Schema Extraction**: Analyze RDF data to extract a relational schema
2. **SQL Parsing**: Parse SQL query into structured components
3. **Pattern Generation**: Convert SQL elements to SPARQL triple patterns
4. **Query Construction**: Assemble SPARQL query with proper syntax
5. **Execution**: Run SPARQL on RDF store and return results

## RDF Store Integration

### AllegroGraph
```python
executor = SPARQLExecutor(
    store_type=StoreType.ALLEGROGRAPH,
    endpoint="http://localhost:10035/repositories/myrepo/sparql",
    username="user",
    password="pass"
)
```

### Apache Jena Fuseki
```python
executor = SPARQLExecutor(
    store_type=StoreType.FUSEKI,
    endpoint="http://localhost:3030/dataset/sparql"
)
```

### Blazegraph
```python
executor = SPARQLExecutor(
    store_type=StoreType.BLAZEGRAPH,
    endpoint="http://localhost:9999/blazegraph/sparql"
)
```

## Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=sql2sparql

# Run specific test module
pytest tests/test_converter.py
```

## Performance Considerations

- **Schema Caching**: Schema extraction is cached after first run
- **Query Optimization**: Generated SPARQL queries are optimized for execution
- **Batch Processing**: Support for batch conversion of multiple queries
- **Connection Pooling**: Reuse connections to remote SPARQL endpoints

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## Citation

If you use this software in your work, please cite this repository:

```bibtex
@software{sql2sparql2024,
  title={SQL2SPARQL: Automatic SQL to SPARQL Converter},
  author={Your Name},
  year={2024},
  url={https://github.com/phamthi1812/sql2sparql}
}
```

## References

This implementation was inspired by concepts from:
- ABATAL et al. (2019). "SQL2SPARQL4RDF: Automatic SQL to SPARQL Conversion for RDF Querying". IJACSA, Vol. 10, No. 11.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Acknowledgments

This is an independent implementation created for educational and research purposes. The algorithms are inspired by various academic papers in the field of SQL to SPARQL conversion.

## Support

For issues, questions, or suggestions, please:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Contact the maintainers
- Check the documentation

## Roadmap

- [ ] Support for more complex SQL constructs (subqueries, CTEs)
- [ ] Query optimization engine
- [ ] GraphQL interface
- [ ] Docker containerization
- [ ] Web UI for interactive conversion
- [ ] Support for additional RDF stores
- [ ] Performance benchmarking suite
